Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Dina Mira. She's an
evolutionary biologist, author, and teacher. She's a senior scientist
and writer in residence in the Center for Reproductive.
Longevity and equality at the Buck Institute. And today
we're going to talk about her book, A Brief
History of the Female Body, an evolutionary look at
how and why the female form came to be.
So, Doctor Ramiro, welcome to the show. It's a
huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for the invitation. I look
forward to our conversation.
So, before we get into the different physical bodily
traits of the female body that you explore in
the book, let me start by asking you, from
a biological standpoint, how do you define a female?
What is a female
exactly? Great question. So, In biology, um, you know,
we study animals that reproduce in different ways, and
one of those ways is sexual reproduction. Um, AND
so in sexually reproducing species, um, there are usually
two types of gametes. There, there is always two
types of gametes or or sex cells. So there's
usually a big one, we call those eggs and
a small one we call those sperm. And so,
The definition is simple. Females are the individuals in
a species that develop to make eggs, and males
are the individuals that develop to make sperm.
And I mean, uh, are there any aspects of
evolution by natural selection that you think it's important
for people to have a good understanding of uh
to then get a good grasp of the framework
you bring into your book and understand what, where
or how each trait evolved or not?
Yeah, so I'm sure everyone remembers natural selection from
their high school biology class or their college biology
class. So, you know, it's simply that, you know,
individuals with traits that are better suited. Um, TO
their environment, they're more likely to survive and reproduce.
Um, AND, you know, over time, that leads to
gradual genetic change in a population. So, you know,
that's something that everyone learns. But I think there's,
um, you know, aspects of natural selection, um, that
people are less familiar with. Um, SO one of
them is kin selection. So I talk a lot
about kin selection in the book. This is really,
uh, It is natural selection, but it, it's used
to explain the evolution of altruistic behavior, behavior like
parenting as an example, and I talk a lot
about parenting in the book. Um, ANOTHER concept that
people may or may not have learned, it's this
idea of conflict, evolutionary conflict, um, which, you know,
You know sometimes natural selection can act in diff
sort of opposite directions, um, in, you know, on
different genes that are involved in in an interaction.
And these interactions can happen between species, they can
happen between individuals in a species, they can actually
happen within an individual itself. Um, USUALLY, these conflicts
are, are over resources. So, um, You know, conflict,
um, features heavily in my book, um, because, um,
you know, we have these intimate relationships with our
children as an example, but we're not genetically identical
to our children. And so, you know, the, the
opportunity for conflict, you know, is there, especially in
during pregnancy and early childhood. Um. I also talk
about sexual selection, which is really natural selection that
specifically um describes the evolution of traits that help.
Individuals get mates for reproduction and um this operates
um a little bit differently than um And or
it's, it's some of, some of the traits are
sort of counterintuitive. Like they're not necessarily traits that
help an individual survive. Um, YOU know, the famous
example is the peacock's tail, and Darwin himself actually
really puzzled over the peacock's tail. You know, how
could that huge cumbersome, you know, bright tail possibly
be good for the peacock's survival. Um, BUT, you
know, as he first outlined, Darwin. Um, IF that
train, if that, you know, huge set of feathers
helps the male get mates for reproduction, um, then
it's worth making it, um, and lots of birds
do it, and it's, this is not just, um,
restricted to birds. I mean, we see the same
thing in mammals and humans.
So, yeah, we'll probably also come back to some
of these evolutionary mechanisms when later in our conversation,
we talk about motherhood and mother offspring conflict and
things like that. So, uh let me ask you
about the breasts now and before we get into
the sort of evolutionary biology of breasts, let me
ask you first, how do breasts develop?
Yeah, that's a great question, not something that you
typically think about. So it actually starts in utero.
Um, SO, all mammals develop, you know, we call
them breasts, we call them breasts in humans. Um,
BUT in mammals, we call them mammary glands, and
they serve a very specific function, which is to,
um, make milk and feed that milk to developing,
um, infants. Um, AND so development starts in utero.
And actually it's the same for males and females.
Um, AND so basically, I don't know, maybe a
month in to develop it in humans. Obviously, the
timing is different in different species. Um, WE form
these buds, and the buds are like Rudimentary mammary
glands, basically. So, you know, uh, a mammary gland
or a breast has a few components. Um, IT
has the glandular cells that are gonna eventually make
the milk. Um, IT'S got the ducts that are
gonna carry the milk that's getting made by the
gland to the outside of the female's body. Usually,
that's through a nipple. And of course the nipple
is formed in humans um during um Development. And
um and then there's some fat. So there's also
some fat in the area. And so that all
happens in utero, then breast development pauses, um, so
the baby is born and nothing really happens until
puberty. So, um, during puberty, everything, um, And the
female body is sort of, you know, development starts
again. It basically started in utero, it's pauses um
during infancy and childhood, and then everything starts up
again during puberty. Um, AND you just have growth
of what's already there, development of what's already there.
And do other animals have breasts or is this
something exclusive to human females?
Yes, so absolutely other all mammals, actually a defining
feature of mammals is that they have these mammary
glands and um This is, um, this was a
game changer for mammals. So it, you know, mammals
became very successful, um. You know, because of this
quality, um, so no, we're not alone.
And what are the evolutionary origins of breasts?
Very good question. And, um, you know, with a
lot of these questions, I would, I would say
we don't have a solid answer, but people think
about it and, you know, do experiments or, or
do comparative analysis to try and answer the questions.
So I would say the best answer that we
have now is, but, but certainly not conclusive, um,
is that The breast started well before mammals even
existed, and this is often what we see um
when we look at the evolution of traits. So
we think that in the very first animals that
moved onto land, and Laid eggs on land. So
I'm talking about amnios. Amnios include reptiles, mammals, and
birds. So the very first amnios, um, they weren't
living in the water anymore. They weren't reproducing in
the water anymore. So this was a huge shift,
you know, from dependency on water to living on
land. And so they had all these adaptations to
be able to survive out of the water. And,
you know, so, for example, adaptations to their eggs.
So if you, if you think about a, a
salamander egg, you know, salamanders are amphibians that also
live on land, but they're dependent on the water.
So I'm not talking about amphibians, I'm talking about
true land mammals that were able to Live on
land completely independent of water. So they had all
these adaptations, these first amnios, um, adaptations to their
eggs, they were much, um, they're called amnios because
their eggs had all these extra layers. It's called
the amniotic egg. Um, SO that was sort of
a defining feature of these, um, animals. They also
had, um, these glands on their body that secreted
sort of oily substances. So why would they do
that? Well, the oily substances helped waterproof their skin.
And, you know, this was solving a really important
problem with these animals, which is how do we
live on land and have our skin not dry
out. I mean, this is a big problem when
you're out of the water. And so they have
these oil glands. They're really sweat glands, but they
secreted sort of an oilier substance that helped waterproof
the skin. And so what we think happened over
time is that These animals were secreting this oily
substance. The oily substance was good for their skin.
It was good for the eggs as they were
incubating their eggs so that the eggs didn't dry
out. And then over time, we think that some
of the nutritive aspects of milk started to get
produced and secreted from these glands. So, you know,
imagine you've got this animal, it's secreting the substance
to waterproof itself and waterproof its eggs. And then
slowly some new, you know, um certain um enzymes
are are getting produced for the first time that
helps to make milk, different components of milk, the
sort of machinery to make them evolve, and they
get excreted from those glands. And so you can
imagine at some point after these babies are hatching,
they start licking up this sweat from the mother.
And um You know, this is kind of a
huge idea, but scientists have worked out some of
the steps. Like we know in certain genes duplicated
when, you know, some of these milk components first
emerged during evolution, we have sort of the um
comparative evidence on these glands and when they first
evolved, um. And so we think that it was
sort of a gradual process over time, you know,
first we it started out as a sweat gland
that was producing some oily substance, then some nutritive
components get added to it. Um, AND then, I
mean, much more needs to happen. You need to
really elaborate this little sweat gland into a whole
system of ducts and glands that are really pumping
out milk. Um, A nipple, of course, but the
nipple comes later. So, you know, the very first
mammals produced milk, but, um, not all mammals have
a nipple. Like the most, um, the earliest branching
group of mammals includes the platypus and the echidna.
Um, THEY make milk, but they lay eggs, um,
and they don't have nipples. So the babies just
sort of lick the milk off of the bellies
of the mom. So nipples came a little bit
later.
But in the case of human females, I mean,
breasts are a bit different from what we find
in other even closely related species, right? Because they
have these sort of bigger, more prominent fat deposits
and they are a per a permanent body trait
in women. So I, I mean, what's the explanation
for that?
Yes. So, uh, and I think many of your
listeners may not realize this. Um, HUMAN breasts are
unique, not in their function at all, but, you
know, in what they look like. So in most
other animals, the breast is only visible while the
animal is pregnant or nursing, and then it completely
disappears. So they really don't deposit the same amount
of fat that humans do. And so of course,
many people have, you know, tried to come up
with an explanation for why humans put so much
fat on their breasts. It's not necessary. Um, HUMANS,
you know, humans make milk make great milk, but
so do all other mammals, um, so. Again, we
don't have a solid answer. I would say that
there are sort of two big ideas out there,
um. One is, and I, I think this is
the weaker one, there's not a lot of support.
The idea is that the bigger breast, the fatty
breast, evolved to advertise the quality of the female.
Um, IN terms of, in terms of her reproductive
ability, um, to males. So the logic, according to
people who sort of adhere to this idea is
Women who have larger breasts, this, this has a
lot to do with estrogen. So, um, the thought
is women who have larger breasts have higher estrogen
levels or are more responsive to the estrogen in
their bodies. And, um, those same women with higher
estrogen or who are more sensitive to estrogen, also,
um, are more fertile. And so this is, um,
people have tried to support this idea with evidence.
Um, I would say the evidence is very weak,
and this is not, this hypothesis is not just
restricted to breast. This is a huge sort of
branch of evolutionary biology. Um, ON why certain traits
like the peacock's feathers, like breasts in women. I
mean, they're not traits necessarily tied to males or
females, but there are these traits that are, um,
considered very attractive, um, sometimes very elaborate, and the
question is why did they evolve? And there are
people who argue, oh, well, they evolved as signals
of quality of The individual who possesses that trait.
Um, AND then the other idea is, in a
way much more simple and this actually goes back
to Darwin's ideas on sexual selection. Um, THE idea
is That animals, including humans, but all animals have
these arbitrary preferences, um, for beauty. Um, AND so
at some point, you know, there was, there were
some human females, our ancestors, who had slightly bigger
breasts, and males in that population thought that they
looked good. And this whole evolutionary process went into
effect where more and more males find the fattier
breast attractive and um You know, there's this process
called runaway selection, which basically results in sort of
this permanent body traits in women. Um, I wouldn't
say there's a lot of evidence for this idea
either, um, but these are sort of the two
ideas that are being kicked around. And if you're
interested in the second idea that I mentioned, um,
there is an excellent book called The Evolution of
Beauty. I don't know if you've talked to Rick
Prum. Um, I worked with him briefly when I
was a graduate student. Um, BUT anyway, he wrote
an excellent book that, um, He's very passionate about
this topic, so it's called the evolution of beauty,
and he's really trying to revive Darwin's original ideas
on um sexual selection. Yeah.
So, and how about menstruation? How does it work
and why is it that it first appears around
puberty in females?
OK, so how does it work? Um, Well, we
know that the cycle's controlled by hormones, um, and
these are hormones produced both in the brain and
hormones produced in the ovaries. And so, you know,
we kind of split the cycle into two parts.
The first part of the cycle, um, is dominated
by estrogen. Estrogen is produced in the ovaries by
basically these things called follicles that are, um, that
contain our eggs. And so these follicles start producing
estrogen. And this estrogen is really important. It signals
all over the body, um, important places, it signals
is to the brain. Um, AND then it also
signals to the uterus. And so what it's telling
the uterus to do is Um, plump up, you
know, make more cells so that in the event
that the female gets pregnant, you know, the, the
uterus is ready for the baby. So estrogens telling,
telling the uterus, you know, make yourself thicker. Um,
IT'S a proliferative signal. It's basically telling cells in
the uterus to divide. And then at some point,
estrogen in this first half of the cycle reaches
this threshold, um, and it tells the brain, OK,
these eggs are ready, let's ovulate one. AND so
the brain sends messages to the ovaries to ovulate
an egg. And what's left of that follicle, the,
the, that structure that houses the egg, that the
cells that are left start producing progesterone. And so
the second half of the cycle is really dominated
by progesterone. And progesterone is also sending signals, you
know, to the body. Um, ONE of the important
things that's telling the uterus to do, cause we're
talking here about menstruation, is Not to make more,
it's not a proliferative signal, it's a transformative signal.
So it's telling the cells of the uterus of
the endometrium, the lining of the uterus, really to
um Get, get, get ready, you know, the cells
that are dividing, they would not be able to
support a pregnancy. You need those cells, but what
you really need right before pregnancy is for those
cells to transform into a completely different state, you
know, they're called decidual cells. The term is unimportant.
Um. And so, and those cells, once they transform,
they're dependent on progesterone. Um, AND progesterone is the
pregnancy hormone. So if you get pregnant, um, your
body keeps making progesterone. Ultimately in humans, this isn't
true for all species, in humans, the plus the
placenta, which is part of the baby, um, takes
over the uh production of progesterone, but, um, Progesterone
is critical for pregnancy, and if you don't get
pregnant, then progesterone levels drop. So your body stops
making it. The signals from the baby aren't coming
because there is no baby. Progesterone drops. And when
you don't have progesterone, those cells of the endometrium
that have transformed, they self-destruct. Basically, those cells to
stay alive, they require progesterone. And so that self-destruction
is really what starts menstruation. So you menstruate, you're
back to day one, and then you sort of
need to grow up your uterus again after menstruation
because you've lost all of that tissue. And so,
we're back to estrogen in the first half of
the cycle. Why does this start happening at puberty?
Um, WELL, It isn't until puberty that the ovaries
start developing again. So they kind of paused their
development in utero. They stopped making, you know, they
were making hormones in utero. They stopped, the baby
is born, pause development. And then Um, we don't
know exactly what the triggers of puberty are, but
I, it's probably a combination of things, genetics, environmental
signals, but at some point the body realizes, OK,
I'm big enough, I'm fat enough, you know, you
need certain energy stores to be able to sustain
a pregnancy, and that's really what puberty is about.
It's the body thinks it's now ready to support
a pregnancy. Um, AND so once it's getting this
combination of signals, the pelvis, by the way, in
humans needs to be large enough to let a
baby pass through, so your bone development has to
reach a certain stage. Anyway, so once the brain
basically tells the rest of the body, we're ready,
let's, let's, you know, kickstart puberty. Um, THE ovaries
start to develop again and so then they start
producing the estrogen and all of the hormones needed
to um get the cycles going.
Uh, BUT why has menstruation evolved? I mean, what
is the point of uh females, women particularly uh
experiencing this kind of bleeding? I mean, apart from
it just simply being a consequence of uh getting
rid of the cells that were in the uterus
prepared to receive a baby.
Yeah, that's a great question. I've thought a lot
about this professionally. Um, I mean, I think, first,
it's important to say that we're not the only
species to menstruate. So there are a few other
mamm, not a few, there are, I would say
about 80 species of mammals, and, you know, there
are over 5000 species of mammals. So it's a
small percentage, say 1 to 2% of mammals menstruate.
They're not all related to each other, so yes,
the higher primates, so the monkeys and the apes
and obviously humans, all menstruate, which is, you know,
not surprising because we're all closely related. So clearly
menstruation evolved in our ancestor. Um, BUT then there's
some other species, a few species of bats, one
rodents, um, the elephant shrew, which is related to
elephants. So this is really puzzling. Usually when you
see a trait pop up in multiple sort of
places in our family tree of mammals, um, you
wonder about traits like that. And so, To answer
the question, why do we menstruate? Well, the honest
answer is we don't know, um, but I do
think that we have some really good leads on
why. Um, AND so the first thing I will
say is Me and my colleagues, we wrote about
this. We don't believe that the trait that needs
explaining is menstruation. So that's not the trait that
actually evolved. The trait that evolved, so menstruation, like
I described, is tied directly to the state of
those cells of the endometrium. So I, I described
those cells of the endometrium. In the first part
of the cycle, they make more of themselves and
then they transform. And once they transform their dependence
on progesterone. All mammals have these cells, OK? All
mammals. With invasive placentas, we don't need to get
into that. Let's say most mammals have these cells,
these cells that basically build up, transform, and then
support a pregnancy if the female's pregnant. But most
mammals don't transform that tissue until a pregnancy. So
this is really a critical distinction between menstruating species
and non-menstruating species. In non-menstruating species, the cells of
the uterus, they build up. And then nothing happens
until there's an actual fertilized egg that's traveling down
the reproductive tract, and that and that developing embryo
starts to implant in the uterus. So for all,
most, most mammals, it's the implantation that sends the
signal to those cells to transform. In menstruating species,
that's not what happens. What happens is every single
cycle, those cells become Um, ready for pregnancy. And
once those cells become ready for pregnancy, whether it's
in a menstruating or non-menstruating species, once those cells
transform, if you take away progesterone, they're gonna die.
And so the trait that we think needs explaining
is this trait of cyclical transformation of the endometrium
into that pregnancy state. That's, that's really what's the
puzzle, but why did that emerge? And I would
say this this first part of this hypothesis is
pretty solid. Like there's a very tight correlation between
the species that menstruate and the species that transform
their uterus, every cycle versus just when they're pregnant.
And we also do lots of experiments in the
lab that show that those two traits are totally
tied. And so the sort of hypothesis really is
why the cells transform in humans and other menstruating
species. And I would say the best answer we
have for that is we think, so those cells,
once they transform, they become Like gatekeepers, so they
transform and they have this amazing ability once they
transform to um Test the quality of the embryo.
If the embryo has a lot of problems with
it, the those cells of the endometrium that have
transformed, they reject implantation. They don't let that developing
embryo implant into the uterus. And if the baby
is seems to be healthy and it's doing everything
it's supposed to be doing, then it will actually
encapsulate that developing embryo and support its implantation. And
One last piece of this, humans and potentially this
is the one part of the hypothesis that I
think needs more support. Humans for certain, have much
higher rates of unhealthy embryos than other species. For
a reason for reasons that we don't totally understand.
Humans make a lot of Developmentally abnormal embryos. And
so this mechanism of screening through embryos may have
been really important for the reproductive success of females
of menstruating species. So that's, I'll leave it there,
but, but I point out that it's still a
hypothesis. I would say to really prove this, or
to get more support for it, we would need
to Better understand the rate of chromosomal problems and
developmental problems in other species that menstruate. And actually
we do have that data for rhesus monkeys. Rhesus
monkeys are like humans, because people, a lot of
people study monkeys um in laboratories and primate centers
and and Monkey, that species of monkey, um, also
has a comparable rate of of chromosomal problems, but
I think we'd need to, um, we'd need that
data from other species to really support this idea
that This cyclical transformation of the endometrium evolved, um.
To, so that the uterus could be a better
biosensor of embryo quality.
That is really fascinating. So let me ask you
now about the female orgasm. Why is it considered
an evolutionary puzzle and the male orgasm is not?
Yeah, great question. Um, The male orgasm is not
a puzzle, because it's directly tied to the reproductive
success of the male. So the male needs to
have an orgasm to release sperm from his body.
So there's this direct connection between reproductive success and
this traits of male orgasm. That is completely not
the case in females, in human females at least.
And most of the work here has been done
on humans. So in humans, There is no evidence
that women, this is as a as an example,
there's no evidence that women who have more orgasms
have more babies. I mean, there's no connection there
at all that we've been able to find. So
that's the puzzle. Why does this complicated trait exist
in um Women, if It has no bearing on
their reproductive success.
OK, and so why does it exist?
Is the is
the female orgasm and an evolved adaptation?
Another very contentious topic, um, so I would say
there are some people who argue, OK, yes, maybe
the female orgasm isn't required, but maybe it helps
reproductive success. So there are still people who Believe
this idea that female orgasm is tied to reproductive
success. Those people are, um, you know, in science,
we sometimes find this we're all human beings, like
you get really attached to your idea, even though
all the evidence suggests that you're wrong. And I
would say that for this idea on the female
orgasm, there really is no evidence that Women who
orgasm easier or women who have more orgasms are
more successful reproductively. They don't have more babies, so
there's really no evidence there. And then there's some
other people who argue. That it's just an accident.
So, you know, females have orgasms really because males
and females develop very similarly when, you know, they're
in the womb. Um, AND so we develop all
the machinery to have an orgasm because very early
on males and females in development look the same.
So we have all of the machinery and the
wiring to have an orgasm, really because males need
it. Um, BECAUSE it is so tied to males
reproductive. So that's one idea, and I think it
makes a lot of sense. Um, AND then the
last idea, which is kind of newer, and actually
it was put forth by my PhD advisor, so
I'm familiar with this hypothesis is The female orgasm
in women now has no purpose, but they argue
that earlier in our mammalian history, and I would,
I think even earlier than that, like in the
very first those ammiots that I was talking about,
the very first land animals, um. And I should
say, cause we didn't get to this, other animals
do have or orgasms. Um, THEY might not look
the same as a human orgasm, but, but, you
know, a lot of the physical things that happen
to a human during an orgasm also happen to
other animals, both males and females. So, um, that's
sort of an important part of this story. Um,
SO this Um, hypothesis put out by my PhD
adviser, and he actually has some support for it,
is that Let's say stick with mammals. In the
very first mammals. They didn't ovulate like humans. So
humans ovulate every cycle, you know, it's, it's sort
of like what happens in our uterus. Every cycle
our uterus gets ready for pregnancy. Every cycle, we're
putting out an egg. There's no external signal needed
for that. Our bodies take care of ovulation all
on their own. But in the very first mammals,
and in a lot of mammals still today. The
way that they, the female ovulated is when she
was copulating with a male, so she only released
an egg during copulation. Um, AND this totally makes
sense, right? You, you release an egg when it's
needed, right? And it's needed if there's sperm around
to fertilize the egg. And so, I won't go
into all the details of this hypothesis, but the
idea is that in those in those um species
that were ovulating that way, the orgasm had a
very specific function, which was to signal to the
brain that copulation was happening. And um then the
brain tells the ovaries to release an egg. So
really the function. Original function of the orgasm, according
to this hypothesis, was to ovulate. Um, IT was
like a way for the brain to know that
copulation was happening and it's time to release an
egg. And the, you know, there's a lot of
support for this. I think it's interesting. In humans,
we don't ovulate that way anymore, so it's just
a relic of this sort of past um history.
Anyway, so 3 ideas, I would say, um, and
we don't have the answer.
Yeah, fair enough. And, and, but do we know
if the female orgasm serves any functions apart from
just uh allowing women to experience a particular kind
of uh women or females. Experience a particular kind
of pleasure. I mean, you said that women who
orgasm are not more reproductively successful than women or
females who don't orgasm, but are there any other
functions that the orgasm might serve or not?
I, I don't believe there to be other functions,
um, which is kind of wonderful for women, that
it's purely a, a trait for pleasure, um, but
that's not to say that it didn't have a
function like I just said, in our historical, you
know, prehistorical past. So I think it may have
had a very important function, and I think it
still has that function in some mammals. So rabbits,
for example, and, and my adviser who put this
idea out there has actually done an experiments on
rabbits to kind of find support for this idea.
They ovulate during copulation. Um, SO I think This
is, this is true of many traits. Um, SOME
of these traits are so old, and, um, you
know, like the human appendix, you know, that's a
trait that had some function a long time ago,
but it doesn't anymore. And so, you know, you
see sometimes these traits that are sort of relics
of something that was important a long time ago,
like millions, hundreds of millions of years ago. And
so, I think if the orgasm had a function,
you know, it could have been tied to ovulation.
Um, DOES it still have a function in women
other than bringing pleasure, I don't believe so. I,
I don't, I haven't seen any data to suggest
that it has another function.
Another thing that you talk about in the book
is love. So how do you approach love from
an evolutionary perspective?
Yes, um, this is actually one of my favorite
chapters to write because I knew the least about
this topic. Some of the topics I knew I
was very intimately familiar with like pregnancy and um.
Menstruation, you know, uh, some of the things that
we're, we've already discussed, um, Yes. I didn't know
much about this branch of evolutionary biology, which really
is, I would say, the branch that studies mate
choices. So, love in humans is thought to be
an elaboration of All of the systems in the
brain that are involved in mate choices and other
animals. And so we know from studying other animals
that they're evaluating mates. I mean, birds are a
great um group to really understand mate choice because
um they're doing some just really amazing things like
The elaborate plumage, some of the dancing that, you
know, some males will do to attract females. Um,
THE choices that females are making while she's evaluating
males, so it's this whole, um, Sort of area
in evolutionary biology that is trying to understand what
mate choices are being made, why are they they
being made. And love, I would describe as sort
of an elaboration of um mate choices in other
animals.
And is there anything particular about female love?
Yes, that's a great question. So, We'll make it
more general and say female mate choices, um, and
I would say that If you look across animals.
It's usually the females that are making the choices.
It's not always true, but it's usually the females
that are evaluating and making the choice. It's usually
not the male. The male is showing off, showing
off his feathers, doing his dance, um, bringing Um,
presence, you know, maybe food items or whatever it
might be. Again, I'm talking generally across animals. It's
usually the females who are making the choices. And
the reason for that, we think, is that it
is usually the females who invest very heavily in
reproduction. So if you think about a female monkey
or really any female mammal. The female is going
to spend a long time being pregnant. The female
is gonna spend a long time nursing. If it's
a primate, you know, there's additional work involved, especially,
you know, the human primates. So it's a huge
investment. And so the thought is and You know,
part of this hypothesis is supported by cases where
the situation is reversed, where males are doing most
of the um caregiving and investing more care. Um,
The thought is, when you're making such a huge
investment in reproduction, Who you choose, who you fall
in love with, quote unquote, is really important because
it that's the only place where you have a
chance to um Decide the quality of that offspring,
you know, you wanna choose a male who is
very attractive because maybe those babies then will be
very attractive, and they will be able to be
successful reproductively and have more offspring. Um, YOU want
a male who brings you food and helps you,
um, reproduce better, you know, helps your pregnancy go
smoother, whatever it is, um. There are cases where
the situation is reversed, males do most of the
caregiving, and in those cases, it's the males who
are evaluating and choosing and um quote unquote, falling
in love. Um, SO, I, I think a lot
of These decisions have to do with um Reproductive
investment. Who's doing the investing? And in some species,
both male and female are are investing heavily. Like
I would argue in our species, both male and
female. Obviously the female, she's going through pregnancy, she's
nursing her baby. That is an incredibly long commitment,
and she can only have one or two babies
at a time, whereas a male can go off
and have, you know, an infinite number of children,
really. Like, he's only limited by sperm production. But
humans are different, human males are different from other
primates. They do invest a lot more in caregiving,
and this is a trait we see across all
human populations. It's not just a modern trait. It's,
it's really something that's widespread. So, um, that's why
in humans, you know, there are choices being made
both by males and females, and you could say
that we're both, we both can fall in love,
um. You know, because we're Uh, I would argue
it's because, you know, it really stems from, um,
both male and female really investing heavily in reproduction.
Mhm. Uh, EARLIER you mentioned pregnancy, so let's talk
a little bit about that now. How has pregnancy
evolved in human females?
So, pregnancy is a fascinating trait. It's probably not
one that a lot of people think about. Um,
I would say. The first thing that it's important
to realize is that not All mammals get pregnant.
I think I mentioned this before, the very first
mammals laid eggs, and so something happens. In our
evolutionary history, where we went from laying eggs to
actually developing our very young um offspring inside our
bodies, and mammals weren't the only animals to do
this. So this, this transition to pregnancy from laying
eggs has happened over 100 times, believe it or
not. Um, SO it's happened in reptiles, it's happened,
um, it has not happened in birds, um, but
it's happened many, many times in reptiles, interestingly. And
what's really interesting about that is that it usually
happens in places that um are very cold and
the altitude is very high. And so I think
that tells you something about what the advantages of
pregnancy are. Um. You know, imagine you're laying your
eggs, you're a mammal, and imagine it's a freezing
day and all your eggs die. Um, SO I
think in certain environments, it makes a lot more
sense to rather than leaving your offspring to develop
out in the open, you're, you know, you're taking
some control over that development by keeping retaining those
babies in your body. Um, AND this was a
game changer for mammals. I mean, I said mammals
were very successful as a group because of mammary
glands, but really, they're really successful mammals, the ones
that just went all over the planet, and they're
so, most species of mammals, except for the few
that we've been talking about, the platypus, the echidna,
there are some marsupials that don't have a full
fledged placenta, but the really successful group of mammals
are the ones that have a placenta. So, anyway,
um, humans, you know, are part of this story,
but they're not the beginning of the story. The
beginning of the story is how that transition from
egg laying to Um, growing your babies inside your
body, how that transition happened. I've been very interested
in that transition from a mechanistic standpoint, like, how
did it happen? And it really needed changes both
in the baby and the mother. So the mother
needed to change her uterus, um, in order to
accept this foreign half foreign object. Um, SHE needed
lots of changes to her immune system, to the
uterus itself, um, and then the baby, of course,
needed to develop tissues that are able to invade
the mother and get what it needs from the
mother. And we don't need to get into the
mechanisms here, but, um, a lot of my work
has focused on a certain type of element, genetic
element. It's, it's, it's a, it's almost like a
genetic virus. You can think of it as this
entity that spreads all across genomes, and over half
the human genome really originates from these genomic parasites,
these like viruses that spread all around. And so
we think that pregnancy and mammals at least evolved
by the spreading of these parasites all around the
genome, and that enabled this huge change to happen.
I mean, it's a really remarkable um set of
change, not just one change, this whole set of
changes that needed to happen.
But in the case of women, what are the
most common complications associated with pregnancy?
Women, complications, gestational diabetes, preeclampsia? Miscarriage, and I touched
on the miscarriage earlier, that is likely tied to
This, this huge number of, you know, developmentally abnormal
embryos that humans make. Um, PRETERM labor certainly is
one, infection, so, um, There are a lot of
complications, unfortunately, um. I would say those are the
most common.
Um, ARE some of those complications related to the
fact that we are bipedal?
Yes, well, I think the We have a difficult
time giving birth and You know, the reason for
that has to do with us being bipedal. Um,
YOU know, we have certain constraints on our pelvis,
the shape of our pelvis, um, when we You
know, our ancestors started to stand up right? And
we also make babies with very large heads. But
I would, honestly, I would say that those obstetric
issues are less of an issue than some of
those other diseases I mentioned, like preeclampsia, gestational diabetes,
um. I think You know, it makes childbirth very
difficult for us, but it's, it's not, um, you
know, in places where there isn't, um, there aren't
hospitals, um, it is not the obstetrical issues are
not a major problem. I mean, they are a
problem, but I think these other cases, you know,
of diabetes and preeclampsia are probably bigger issues. Mhm.
And what characterizes motherhood in humans specifically?
Oh my gosh, that's a big question. Um, I
would say that. I mean, I'm a biologist, so
I focus on the biology. I would say that
some of The way that we think about motherhood
and the way we mother. Some of it is
certainly influenced by the cultures in which we live.
Absolutely. But I would also argue, and again, I,
I can't help it. I'm a biologist. I would
also argue that biology plays a major role in
how we mother and You know, so one thing
that we know is when we're pregnant and when
we give birth, that Affects the hormones that we're
making. Um, THAT affects our brains. It affects, it,
it actually affects the structure of our brains. So
there are some major changes, physiological and even anatomical
changes that are happening in our bodies as we
engage in motherhood. And so, Um, I think You
know, it's this complex interplay between, you know, cultural
um influences, but also biological influences. And one thing
I would say is From the evolutionary biological perspective,
mothers evolved to be very flexible, human mothers, but
also other animal mothers. So there is no one
way to do anything. Um, WE actually evolved to
be very flexible in how much care we give
our offspring, um, who we're investing in at any
one given time. So, you know, the most successful
mothers in the past were the ones who are
very flexible and considering all their options. Um, And
then a whole other sort of area that we
haven't touched on too much is this idea of
conflicts. So, you know, maybe we can touch on
that now, um. Certainly. Mothers evolved. Certain behaviors and
um. You know, hormonal thing, you know, the evolution
of hormones and their responses and, you know, all
of that affects. Maternal behaviors with our children and
To a certain extent for sure, we want our
children to succeed. We want them to um You
know, we want them to, again, in an evolutionary
bio biological sense, we, we, we want them to
succeed and reproduce themselves. Those, you know, that's ultimately,
um, what makes us as mothers successful. Again, not,
uh, not, I'm not speaking as a human mother.
Um, I'm speaking from, you know, the perspective of,
of biology. Um, AND so there has to be
a cooperative nature to that relationship. The mom and
the baby need to cooperate for, um, that baby
to grow up successfully and then go on and
have their own kids. But there is an element
of conflict in this relationship between moms and their
children. And the ultimate reason for that is that
moms and each child that they have, they're not
genetically identical. And That sets up a situation where
what's best for the genes and the mom might
not be what's best for the genes in any
one child. The mom is thinking evolved to be
thinking about um her reproductive success overall. And this
is this isn't conscious. I don't mean she's actively
thinking about this, but You know, the decisions that
moms make, um, they're, they're considering the whole package,
like, how successful am I gonna be as a
mother over my whole life. The moms who raised
more babies successfully did better, and the traits that
she had that allowed her to do better, those
are the ones that get propagated over time. It's
a very different story for the babies. The babies.
Again, this is because of genetics. They are really
thinking about themselves, right? The babies that extracted as
much as possible from their mothers, potentially at the
expense of a sibling, or potentially at the expense
of the mother, those babies did better. And so
there's this Underlying tension and, you know, you really
see that tension during pregnancy, um. Babies, because pregnancy
in humans and other species with invasive placentas, because
these, the mom and the baby are so intimately
connected physically, so the baby is like directly bathed
in the mother's blood. I mean, it's a very
intimate connection that interface, the placenta really is where
it all happens. The baby is dumping all of
these hormones into the mother that are essentially manipulating
her to do things that the baby wants, like,
give me more food. The baby wants it all.
The mother wants that any one baby to make
it through pregnancy and, you know, survive and, you
know, be successful, but not at the expense of
her own health, not at the expense of potentially
future offspring. So, um, we see a lot of
evidence of this where, um, You know, babies have
certain there during pregnancy, they're producing certain molecules. Once
the babies are born, they have certain behaviors that
are really manipulative behaviors like give me more, and
this really all stems from dad's genes, uh, whereas
moms, you see lots of evidence of restraint, like,
yes, I wanna give you this, but not too
much, um, and so, you know, you've got this.
Cooperative, but also this underlying tension that underlies sort
of the relationship between mom and child.
So that covers the topic of mother offspring conflict.
Let me get into the last trait I would
like to ask you about today. So, what is
menopause and how has it evolved?
Right, so menopause is obviously the end of reproductive
function. So in humans, it's the end of menstrual
periods. It happens about 50 in our species. Um,
THERE are a lot of theories on why it
evolved. I don't think menopause itself is what's so
interesting. Because, you know, just a tiny bit of
background. All mammals and all birds. They make all
their eggs up front, so they're born with all
the eggs they will ever have. And so if
you're a mammal or if you're a bird, if
you live long enough, you will go through menopause.
So really the trait that's unusual in humans and
a few other species because we're not the only
animals to go through menopause. What's really interesting is
this extended period of life that we have after
menopause. Um, And there are many ideas on why
that postmenopausal life stage exists. Some of those ideas
are adaptive ideas, like, they suggest that There was
some purpose that menopause and this postmenopausal life stage,
um, It it evolved for a purpose, right? And
then other folks will say, well, it's there's no
reason for it, it's just, it just happened like.
You know, our eggs don't last, can't last long
enough. So, and but we started living longer. So,
you know, there are sort of two, there's a
big debate on, you know, whether it served a
purpose, sort of this stopping reproduction and living for
so long afterwards, um, or if it's just an
artifact um that has no function.
And I, I mean, what is the relationship between
menopause and longevity?
Yeah, that's a great question, because, so I mentioned
the other species that have menopause. It's 4 or
5 species of toothed whales, so beluga whales, narwhals,
killer whales, and short-finned pilot whales. And they all
live a long time. Um, AND it's not just
that they live a long time. If you compare
them to closely related species, they live longer than
animals they're closely related to of about the same
size. So it's certainly related to longevity. That said,
there are some animals that have extreme longevity that
don't appear to go through menopause. So, Uh, another
land mammal, the African elephants, has a lifespan that's
similar to humans, but they reproduce over a decade
longer than humans. So just because you live a
long time does not mean you must go through
menopause, if that makes sense. I'm really interested in
a species of whale, not the menopausal whales, but
a species of baleen whale that Has a very
long, it's like the longest lived mammal, it's the
bowhead whale, and it doesn't appear to go through
menopause. So there's evidence of these whales reproducing um
in into, you know, over over 100 years old.
Um, SO, tied to longevity, yes, but that's not,
that can't explain it all.
OK, so one last question then and still on
the topic of menopause or at least related to
it. What do you make of the grandmother hypothesis?
Oh, I think there are different, so there are
different versions of it first of all. One version
of it. Just describes the longevity piece. So that
version says, well, we inherited menopause at 50, because
chimps, our closest primate relatives, go through menopause at
50. So, we inherited menopause. And then we, but
so the real difference that needs to, um, that
we need to understand is why do humans live
so much longer than chimps. And so one Um,
Version of the grandmother hypothesis tries to explain that
why humans started living longer and it really Centers
around maternal grandmothers and sort of this new behavior
that evolved in humans on the part of maternal
grandmothers, which is that they started um Breeding more
cooperatively. All that means is they started to play
a much bigger role in family life. So, this
idea was really mainly developed by um an anthropologist
who studied the Hadza tribe in Tanzania, and she
noticed that in this tribe, the grandmothers have a
Very important role, which is digging up these very
hard tubers from the ground and processing them and
feeding it to the grandchildren. So the idea is
in human populations where grandmothers were engaging in these,
these behaviors, that Helps The descendants of that grandmother,
there were more of them because she was helping
her daughter reproduce and helping her grandchildren eat, and
Again, this idea really suggests that because of that
new behavior, this grandmothering behavior, that extended the human
lifespan longer and longer. I think there's some weaknesses
to that hypothesis. The other version of the hypothesis
is not just that that behavior extended the human
lifespan, but also that it The women who were
grandmothering. They had to stop reproducing in order to
do that effectively. Um, SO there's also a version
of it, like I said, that explains why menopause
has to happen at 50 in our species, because,
you know, the age of menopause can evolve. I
mean, You know, it doesn't, you know, there are
animals with very different lifespans, and they have very
different reproductive life spans. So, you know, menopause is
not something that has to be fixed at a
certain time. Um, FOR whatever reason in humans, it
did not move since um our last common ancestor
with chimps. I think there's a lot more to
this story. We don't, I don't know that we
have time to get into it, but um, I
think so, in summary of my thoughts on the
grandmother hypo hypothesis, I think it might be part
of the story. We certainly, the human lineage certainly
evolved new behaviors like grandmothering, um. But I think
in general, we became a much more cooperative species,
so I don't know that grandmothering itself was like
the critical behavior. I think it was, you know,
a more general behavior that evolved in humans that
I do, excuse me, I do think contributed to
human longevity, um. I don't know that we have
a good understanding of why. Our reproductive lifespan didn't
also extend. I mean, I think that's an open
question.
Uh, I mean, uh, by the way, related to
that, let me just ask you one more question.
So, do we know if children who have grandmothers
have higher fitness in any way?
So that's when I said the evidence is mixed,
that's really what I'm talking about. So in some
populations that have been studied, the presence of a
grandmother. Helps survival, but in others it does nothing,
and in others it actually might detract from your
success. So I think the demographic conditions. In which
these traits were evolving were really critical. And so
when we're studying modern populations, it's hard to capture
exactly what the situation was in ancestral humans. Um
But certainly there are some populations where the presence
of the maternal grandmother or even a paternal grandmother,
um, It is a good thing for grandchildren. It
helps them, more of them survive, absolutely. It's just
not across the board in all populations that have
been studied. Mhm.
OK, great. So the book is again a brief
history of the female body, an evolutionary look at
how and why the female form came to be.
I'm leaving the link to it in the description
of the interview. And Doctor Amir, uh, apart from
the book, would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Yes, um, I have a website that's probably the
easiest place to go, Dina Amera.com. Um, I'm also
on Instagram and LinkedIn and all those places, um,
so yeah, you can just type in my name
and look me up.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure and very fun to talk with you.
Thank you so much. I had a lot of
fun as well.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick Punteran
Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary Galman
Samov Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky,
Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray, Zigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin. And yoursnacht,
a special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon,
Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.